README.md, before:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# anpan <img src="man/figures/logo.png" align="right"/>

<!-- badges: start -->
<!-- badges: end -->

The goal of anpan is to consolidate statistical methods for strain
analysis. This includes testing genetic elements for association with
outcomes, phylogenetic association testing, and ….

## Requirements

anpan requires the following R packages, most of which which can be
installed from CRAN:

    install.packages(c("ape", 
                       "brms", 
                       "data.table", 
                       "dplyr", 
                       "purrr", 
                       "tibble", 
                       "tidyr", 
                       "furrr", 
                       "ggnewscale",
                       "patchwork", 
                       "progressr",
                       "rstanarm")) # add Ncpus = 4 to go faster

    install.packages("cmdstanr", repos = c("https://mc-stan.org/r-packages/", getOption("repos")))

If the `cmdstanr` installation doesn’t work you can find more detailed
instructions [at this link](https://mc-stan.org/cmdstanr/).

## Installation

You can install anpan from github with:

``` r
devtools::install("biobakery/anpan")
```

## Example - element testing

You can filter large uniref tables and look for associations with
outcomes (while controlling for covariates) with `anpan_batch`. Right
now this only works for glm-based models.

``` r
library(tidyverse)
library(data.table)

library(furrr) 
plan(multisession, workers = 2) # Run with two background processes on the local machine

library(progressr)
handlers(global=TRUE) # show progress bars for long computations

library(anpan)


anpan_batch(bug_dir = "/path/to/gene_families/",
            meta_file = "/path/to/metadata.tsv",
            out_dir = "/path/to/output",
            annotation_file = "/path/to/annotation.tsv", #optional, used for plots
            filtering_method = "kmeans",
            model_type = "glm",
            covariates = c("age", "gender"),
            plot_ext = "pdf",
            save_filter_stats = TRUE)
```

This will create the output directory with tables of regression
coefficients, top-results plots, and filter statistics.

## Example - phylogenetic generalized linear mixed model

You can run a PGLMM with the `anpan_pglmm` function. This fits a model
where the covariance matrix of outcomes is determined from the
phylogenetic tree. Right now there’s only gaussian outcomes, and no
regularization on the covariance matrix.

``` r
meta_file = "/path/to/metadata.tsv" 
tree_file = "/path/to/file.tre"

anpan_pglmm(meta_file,
            tree_file,
            trim_pattern = "_bowtie2",
            covariates = NULL,
            plot_cov_mat = TRUE,
            outcome = "age",
            verbose = TRUE,
            cores = 4)
```

Commit message:

update Stan installation instructions in readme

README.md, after:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# anpan <img src="man/figures/logo.png" align="right"/>

<!-- badges: start -->
<!-- badges: end -->

The goal of anpan is to consolidate statistical methods for strain
analysis. This includes testing automated filtering of metagenomic
functional profiles, genetic elements for association with outcomes, and
phylogenetic association testing.

## Requirements

anpan uses Stan, which means your R installation needs to be able to
compile C++14 code. On Linux this means you will need to create a
Makevars file if you don’t already have one set up using the following R
command (instructions for other operating systems can be found at [this
link](https://github.com/stan-dev/rstan/wiki/RStan-Getting-Started)):

    dotR <- file.path(Sys.getenv("HOME"), ".R")
    if (!file.exists(dotR)) dir.create(dotR)
    M <- file.path(dotR, "Makevars")
    if (!file.exists(M)) file.create(M)
    cat("\nCXX14FLAGS=-O3 -march=native -mtune=native -fPIC",
        "CXX14=g++", # or clang++ but you may need a version postfix
        file = M, sep = "\n", append = TRUE)

anpan requires the following R packages, most of which which can be
installed from CRAN:

    install.packages(c("ape", 
                       "brms", 
                       "data.table", 
                       "dplyr", 
                       "purrr", 
                       "tibble", 
                       "tidyr", 
                       "furrr", 
                       "ggnewscale",
                       "patchwork", 
                       "progressr",
                       "rstanarm")) # add Ncpus = 4 to go faster

    install.packages("cmdstanr", repos = c("https://mc-stan.org/r-packages/", getOption("repos")))

If the `cmdstanr` installation doesn’t work you can find more detailed
instructions [at this link](https://mc-stan.org/cmdstanr/).

## Installation

You can install anpan from github with:

``` r
devtools::install("biobakery/anpan")
```

## Example - element testing

You can filter large uniref tables and look for associations with
outcomes (while controlling for covariates) with `anpan_batch`. Right
now this only works for glm-based models.

``` r
library(tidyverse)
library(data.table)

library(furrr) 
plan(multisession, workers = 2) # Run with two background processes on the local machine

library(progressr)
handlers(global=TRUE) # show progress bars for long computations

library(anpan)


anpan_batch(bug_dir = "/path/to/gene_families/",
            meta_file = "/path/to/metadata.tsv",
            out_dir = "/path/to/output",
            annotation_file = "/path/to/annotation.tsv", #optional, used for plots
            filtering_method = "kmeans",
            model_type = "glm",
            covariates = c("age", "gender"),
            plot_ext = "pdf",
            save_filter_stats = TRUE)
```

This will create the output directory with tables of regression
coefficients, top-results plots, and filter statistics.

## Example - phylogenetic generalized linear mixed model

You can run a PGLMM with the `anpan_pglmm` function. This fits a model
where the covariance matrix of outcomes is determined from the
phylogenetic tree. Right now there’s only gaussian outcomes, and no
regularization on the covariance matrix.

``` r
meta_file = "/path/to/metadata.tsv" 
tree_file = "/path/to/file.tre"

anpan_pglmm(meta_file,
            tree_file,
            trim_pattern = "_bowtie2",
            covariates = NULL,
            plot_cov_mat = TRUE,
            outcome = "age",
            verbose = TRUE,
            cores = 4)
```
